my wife is pregnant right now with our
first child and when people see her with
her big baby bump the first question
people ask almost without fail is is it
a boy or is it a girl now there are some
assumptions behind that question that we
take for granted because of our
familiarity with our own human biology
for human babies we take it for granted
that there is a 50-50 chance of either
answer boy or girl but why is it that
way well the answer depends on the sex
determination system that has evolved
for our species you see for most mammals
the sex of a baby is determined
genetically with the XY chromosome
system mammals have a pair of sex
chromosomes one passed down from mom and
one from dad a pair of X's gives us a
girl and an x and y together gives us a
boy since females only have access to
pass on in their egg cells and males can
give either an X or Y in their sperm
cells the sex is determined by the
father and the chance of producing a
male or female is 50-50 this system has
worked well for mammals but throughout
the tree of life we can see other
systems that have worked just as well
for other animals there are other groups
of animals that also have genetic sex
determination but their systems can be
pretty different from ours birds and
some reptiles have their sex genetically
determined but instead of the sex being
determined by dad their sex is
determined by mom in those groups a pair
of Z sex chromosomes produces a male so
these males only halfsies to give
however in these animals onesie and 1w
chromosome together as a pair produces a
female in this system the chance of a
male or a female is still 5050 it just
depends on whether mom puts as e or w
into her egg certain groups have taken
genetic sex determination in completely
other directions ants for example have
one of the most interesting systems for
determining sex and because of it if you
are a male ant you do not have a father
in an ant colony there are dramatic
divisions of labor there are soldiers
that defend the colony there are workers
that collect food clean the nest and
care for the young and there's a queen
and a small group of male reproductive
now the Queen will mate and then store
sperm from the male's and this is where
the system gets really interesting if
the Queen uses the stored sperm to
fertilize an egg then that egg will grow
up to become female however if she lays
an egg without fertilizing it then that
egg will still grow up to be an aunt but
it will always be a male so you see it's
impossible for male ants to have fathers
and male ants live their life like this
with only one copy of every gene much
like a walking sex cell this system is
called a haplo diploid system and we see
it not only in ants but also in other
highly social insects like bees and
wasps since our own sex is determined by
genes and we do know of these other
animals that have their sex determined
by genes it's easy to assume that for
all animals the sex of their babies
still must be determined by genetics
however for some animals the question of
whether it will be a boy or a girl has
nothing to do with jeans at all and it
can depend on something like the weather
these are animals like alligators and
most turtles in these animals the sex of
an embryo in a developing egg is
determined by the temperature in these
species the sex of the baby is not yet
determined when egg is laid and it
remains undetermined until sometime in
the middle of the overall development
period when a critical time is reached
and during this time the sex is
completely determined by temperature in
the nest in painted turtles for example
warm temperatures above the critical
temperature will produce females within
the eggs and cool temperatures will
produce a male I'm not really sure who
came up with this mnemonic but you can
remember that when it comes to painted
turtles they are all hot chicks and cool
dudes for some tropical fish the
question of will it be a boy or will it
be a girl isn't settled until even later
in life you see clownfish all start out
their lives as males however as they
mature they become female they also
spend their lives in small groups with a
strict dominance hierarchy where only
the most dominant male and female
reproduce and amazingly if the dominant
female on the group dies the largest and
most dominant male will then quickly
become female and take her place and all
the other males will move up one rank in
the hierarchy in another very different
ocean animal
the green spoon worm the sex of the
babies is determined by a completely
different aspect of the environment for
this species it is simply a matter of
where a larva happens to randomly fall
on the seafloor if a larva lands on the
open sea floor then it will become a
female but if it lands on top of a
female then it will become a male so for
some species the question of boy or girl
is answered by genetics for others it's
answered by the environment and for
others still they don't even bother with
the question at all take whiptail
lizards for example for those desert
lizards the answer is easy it's a girl
it's always a girl there are nearly all
female species and although they still
lay eggs these eggs hatch out female
clones of themselves so will it be a
girl or will it be a boy throughout the
entire Animal Kingdom it does really all
depend on the system of sex
determination for humans that system is
a genetic XY system and for me and my
wife we found out it's going to be a
baby boy